From Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hansel minutes, a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number one 11
recorded live Tuesday, April 22nd, 2008. Support
for Hanselman it's as provided
by. Tellerik already controls the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forums and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is
also provided by.net developers journal.
The world's leading that net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott sits down
with Phil hack, drew sellers
and Jeffrey Palermo, and talks
about the asp.net MVC project.
And Microsoft's changing attitudes towards
opening. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'm
sitting down here@thealt.net conference, and
I've got Phil hack, the
feature PM for asp.net MVC
got Jeffrey Palermo, the co-creator
of MVC contrib, an opensource
project that he co founded
with Eric Hexter. And I've
got drew seller as a
committer on the castle project.
And one component of the
castle project is monorail, which
is arguably the first NVC
project that gained widespread adoption.
So I think we've got
a really good cross section
of the model view controller
kind of.net ecosystem. And I
wanted to talk a little
bit about the asp.net MVC
project. Some of the things
that the open source community
is doing to make it
better. And then what the
previous MVC project thinks about
that because a lot of
people felt that when asp.net
MVC began to be announced
that the monorail project, the
first widely adopted model view
controller framework would feel like
Microsoft was kind of squashing
you. So, you know, drew,
what do you, what do
you think about that? Well,
being, I guess, a capitalist
at heart, I think that
competition is a really positive
thing. I've already seen features
coming out of the, the
Microsoft NBC framework being poured
it into monorail and some
of the features that are
coming over, ones that I've
been wanting for a long
time, but haven't personally figured
out how to personally figure
out how to implement, but
I've seen them being poured
back over. So, I mean,
at first I was skeptical,
but I've really enjoyed the,
the extra share of knowledge.
So monorail is not going
away. You guys didn't just
say, Oh, we'll shut it
down now. No, it's, it's,
you know, it's still a
bit of a different mindset.
I think. I mean, I
think they're very close. They're
all, they're both espousing separation
concerns, which I think is
just a really important concept,
but the way the workflow
is still a little bit
different, the there are still
some explicit examples. Well, my,
my use of it, I
would say is probably different.
I use, I have it
embedded with castles microkernel Windsor.
And so I use that
quite a bit and I'm
very happy to see that
MBC framework has a nice
plugin for that. But I
mean, and, and this, a
lot of this comes from
my naivete with the, the
Microsoft version NVC framework itself.
But when I was playing
with it, there were, you
know, the, and I apologize,
cause this is, I believe
this is old now, but
the attribute based attributes on
the controller. So originally with
the Microsoft asp.net MVC framework,
if you wanted to expose
a public controller action, you
had to explicitly decorate that
with an attribute, said, this
is an action. And we
had a lot of pushback
from that in the community,
and that was eventually removed.
Yes. And I, and I've
heard that and it's, it's
been very enlightening at the
same time to see Microsoft
taking that feedback and moving
forward at what I consider
to be a fairly rapid
pace. Hmm. So, so what
were some examples of things
that you said that were
being moved over and maybe
an example of the different
mindset that the monorail project
has? And just to be
clear, you had mentioned the
Windsor microkernel, that's one of
the dependency injection containers that
comes with the castle project
it's bundled with castle. So
castle is the overarching name,
correct. And underneath that are
active record your database, your
view on how databases should
be accessed, monorail your view
on how a web application
should be created. And then
the Windsor, microkernel your view
on how dependency injection should
be done? Correct. And I'm
sorry. Now I've asked the
question. The question is what
are some explicit examples of
things that have been brought
over from Microsoft project that
are keeping monorail different and
innovative? Well, the, the big
thing that came over, right?
So this made them closer
together was the concept of
I controller. Okay. I, that
was something that I had
talked about for a while
as wanting in the monorail
framework from just from a
testability perspective, but we had
never gotten to where you
have controllers is you're a
model view controller framework. How
do you implement controllers? No,
we have controllers. So I
control her as in the
interface concept as being the
only thing that you really
needed to have with controller,
it was a fairly heavy
abstract class that you inherited
from the view of a
controller in the monorail world
was a big abstract base
class with a lot of
functionality that you inherit from.
Yes. And so I had
been pushing for a lighter
weight version of that. And
when that came in, there
was a lot of discussion
around how that was really
nice. There was a lot
of positive feedback on that.
And then some of the
committers to the castle project
went through and did an
implementation of that. Very cool.
That's made my life a
lot easier on my apps
where I used castle. And
Phil, do you feel like
you guys are, are kind
of going out there to
crush an open source project?
Absolutely. No, no, of course
not. Yeah. You know, being
from the opensource community myself,
I mean, I I've run
an open source blog engine,
you know, I, I don't
think that's our intention in
any of these things, Presumably
you wouldn't have taken the
job if you thought you
were. If I thought our
only goal Was to crush
open source projects. Yeah. I
wouldn't have taken the job.
I think it, in, in
general, there's sort of this
tension between Microsoft and open
source community about what people
will call the duplication of
efforts. Right. And, and I,
I sort of, you know,
originally kind of like rebelled
against that, but I've come
kind of come around to
a more what I would
like to consider more nuanced
viewpoint on that, which is
that, you know, a, like
most projects are sort of
duplication of ideas of other
projects. Right. You know, just
it copy, but try to
make better. And that's the
hope that we're actually trying
to do something new and
not just rehash restorative been
done, but also that, you
know, in many ways, Microsoft,
for better or for worse,
you know, right or wrong,
this is the situation they're
in, which is that they
do have a market that,
that, you know, can't necessarily
run open source software or,
or a market that won't
try these things. So it,
many times Microsoft still wants
to serve that market right.
Rather than leave them completely
out. I worked in financial
services for seven years and
it was really difficult for
us to get the okay
from legal to bring in
any kind of an open
source frameworks. And it's certainly
not one that we could
lean on, you know, and
build something fundamental on. Now,
Jeffrey, you guys, co-founded the
NBC contribute project, which is
saying that there are things
perhaps that the NBC project
doesn't necessarily provide out of
the box. And you wanted
to add that value right
off the bat. You felt
that, that you found that
this project, as soon as
it was announced, Right. And
Eric Hexter and I were
at the SDR last year,
The software design review for
MVC, when a number of
insiders are brought up to
Microsoft to get a preview
of this, the software and
provide feedback on it. Right.
And we found out that
the first publicly available for
preview is going to be
released in December. So the
day after that was released,
we made that project public.
We'd be, we'd been planning
it for a little while.
And Eric does a lot
of work on the configuration
management and the automatic publishing
and releases and all that
stuff. But essentially we know
that Microsoft's not going to
take a dependency on castle
or in hibernate or structure,
map, or spring, or all
these other third party libraries.
They're not going to take
a dependency on that, but
a DVC contrib can easily
provide the integration points so
that these other libraries and
these other tools can easily
leverage for users of the
Espina MVC framework and provide
extensions on a, what Microsoft
provided. Right? It's a convention
I've seen an opensource to
create a contrib or contributions
project that runs parallel to
that project. I remember the
first time I came upon,
it was when Nancy came
out, Nat, the open source
build server, you know, build
a structure for, for.net and
the net contrib had all
of these other things that
really didn't belong in the
core. So onto that point
about open source and this
particular project, you know, I've
had conversations with various members
of the open source community.
For example, for instance, such
as Hamilton is Hamilton. Hamilton
is the founder of the
castle project. If I remember
correctly. Okay. And just to
get a lot of feedback
from the community, and you'll
notice that the MVC framework
has a lot of extensibility
points in order to make
it easy and possible to
integrate other open source projects.
One point that I'm particularly
happy about is we have
a flavor of the web
application project so that when
you start the project, it
opens up a test wizard
dialogue, and it allows you
to integrate, you know, your
own third party unit test
framework. So whether it's an
unit and the unit or
X unit.net, and, you know,
to, to have that thing
showing up in a visual
studio dialogue, I think that's
new for a lot of
people to, to see that,
you know, this project is
really embracing, you know, integrating
with openings Well, and you're
explicitly enabling Jeffrey and his,
his guys to go and
say, Oh, I can see
where we could give, you
know, breathe new life into
this or that IOC container.
I know that this has
been some recent uptick in
the interest, in a dependency
injection container called Ninjak and
inject, and now has a
contrib project. Does it not?
So I could use that
with can contrib, right? There's
actually six IOC containers that
have integration to the MVC
framework and NBC contrib. There's
the injects spring.net, castle, Windsor
structure, map, unity, unity, and
object builder. So you've got
a lot of choices, right?
So the philosophy is that
choice is good. So whether
it be the MVC framework
or monorail, whether it be
in unit or ms. Test
choice is good, and there's
never going to be one
thing that's going to serve
and satisfy the entire world.
So just like here at
this conference, the one law,
the law of two feet
that applies software to we're
at an open space conference.
And the law of two
feet means that if you
don't like something, you can
walk away. If you're in
a conference session that you're
not appreciating, then you can
just stand up and walk
away. And I've been in
a number of spaces just
now where people have left.
So you can really vote
by using the tool that
makes you the happiest. Oh,
sure. Right. And there's, there's
lots of options. MVC contributes
just a smorgasbord of extra
features that you can use
in conjunction with the MVC
framework. It doesn't take away
anything that Microsoft provides. It
only adds on top of,
are there any places in
MPC country where there's a
statement being made? Like we
think Microsoft did this wrong.
So we providing an alternative,
like a different imagining of
how a controller should work,
or I don't think views
should have been done this
way. Therefore we'll wrap it
and do it in a
different way. Yes. There's a
couple of those one is
the convention controller. And it
has a concept of rescues
where if, if an exception
happens in an action, you
can have it rerouted to
a different action that knows
how to handle errors for
a particular controller. And there's,
there's other Conventions that are
supported in that, in that
controller base class. If you
choose to use it also
view data extensions previously called
smart bag for a little
bit. But if you data
extensions takes the stance, that
strongly type views aren't really
applicable when you have a
application of any complexity and
allows extension methods to strongly
type access, to view data
while while enabling you to
have views without a code
behind file. Interesting. So I
want to take just one
second and thank our sponsors.
And then I want to
ask drew about rescues. Hi,
it's Scott Hanselman here. Hope
you're enjoying the show so
far. I'm coming at you
from another place in time.
Sorry to interrupt the show,
but I want to let
you know that putting together
a podcast like this every
week, isn't free. The folks
that pay the bandwidth bill
is Tellerik they make the
show possible and they also
make some pretty cool products
like teller, excite affinity. It's
a development platform for constructing
websites, community portals, and Internet's
built all on asp.net. Oh,
so you're using the various
well-known goodies like master pages
and membership services, data model
provider, things that you already
know. It's pretty flexible. You've
got a very robust core
that you can customize. You
can plug in anything that
you want from complex applications
for CRM, or just a
little widget that displays the
weather. If you're not big
into the code thing, that's
cool to get a full
set of features out of
the box, like workflow multi-lingual
sites, content, versioning that can
all be added without code.
There's also a whole bunch
of pluggable modules and components
for news blogs, forums, polls
lists. This is all stuff
that you can do without
code. And it's pretty good
looking product as well. You've
got a nice web 2.0
administrative interface that lets you
as well as your boss.
Who's not technical and be
really productive. So check out
site finity.com and we'll get
you right back to the
show. Thanks a lot. So
rescues that Jeffrey mentioned a
moment ago, was this a
way to say that if
something goes wrong within a
controller action, I'm going to
go ahead and redirect to
another one that was borrowed
from monorail. Was it not?
Well, Manuel certainly had it.
Where did that originally come
from? Well, I don't know
where I can't speak to
where it originally came from
because when I got there,
it was already there. The
it's definitely very nice to
have a central spot to
have your exception handling for
website. It's also nice to
be able to do that
by type. And I'm not
sure if the MVC framework
does that by type. Can
you expand on that a
little bit? Yeah. So if
you want a database exception
screen, if you want a
screen for a authentication access,
if you throw, if your
code is throwing an exception,
you do not have access
to do this method. You
can show a screen that
says just that, Oh, it's
a type specific views when
an exception goes wrong. So
you're typing it based on
an exception type. Correct. So
if I throw new Alex,
I'm just trying to think
database exception, or like you
said, a authentication authorization, you
could have separate views for
each of those. Yeah. Yeah.
If you had a framework
exception, you could just show
a generic, Hey, there was
a problem, please retry, if
not contact somebody, if you,
if you caught an application
exception. So one that you've
made that you've thrown such
as a security exception, you
can say, Hey, you're not
authorized to do this. Please
follow these steps and get
permission. Interesting. I can see
where if someone could argue
both that that's a really
good idea, but at the
same time, you're using an
exception and then indirectly causing
an aggregation can see where
someone could argue that you
should catch that and do
the redirect yourself. You certainly
could answer. What do you
think about that, Phil? Is
that something you're going to
put in the NVC? Yeah.
So am I judging by
the name? I'm guessing rescues
came from a rails, which
has the rescue concept. And
so that's definitely something we've
seen. A lot of people
ask us about. So we'll
probably have something like that
at some point. I mean,
right now we have actually
the concept of action filters.
So it's pretty easy to
write one that does that,
but that's something that we're
looking at to have in
the product. And, you know,
I was thinking about the
convention controller, Jeff Jeffrey mentioned,
and the irony there being
in, correct me if I'm
wrong, that I wrote the
first version of that one,
right? The convention control convention
A little bit about this
convention control. Now, certainly if
you've made it this far
into this podcast, and you're
not familiar with MVC, you
might want to back up
or pause and take a
moment to listen to some
of the screencasts or go
up to www.asp.net/nvc. There's a
lot of content that will
get you up to speed
on MVC. So if we're
using terms like action filter
controller, that aren't, you're not
familiar with, you might want
to take a moment to
catch up on that. And
action filters are particularly powerful
aspect of a, of a
machine. I want to come
back to that, but the
notion of an a convention
controller is important because a
fundamental change that controller has
just recently happened with this
latest release. And what is
that and why would someone
dislike it so much that
they would try to recreate
the old style of doing
things? So I'm assuming you're
talking about the, we made,
it made a refactoring where
a controller actions are now
called by another class that
we call the action Invoker
and the controller actions return
a value to them in
the form of an, a
type that derives from action
results. So previously you would
say public void Fu and
then that would be available
to the net just by
virtue of the fact that
it's public. Now, previously, previously,
as we mentioned before, you
used to have to put
an attribute on it and
say, controller action. Then we
just said, if it's public
as part of a controller,
it's available, but it always
had a void return value.
And that made things inconvenient.
Well, that may, what made
things inconvenient was that within
your action method, you had
to call render view. And
what render view would do
was actually try to use
the HP pipeline and spit
out the final view and
use and all of that.
And the problem there that
lied in that is when
you were running a unit
test, you're not running in
the context of a full
request with the whole asp.net
pipeline. And so it became
a big hassle to test
even simple action methods because
you had a mock out
using a fake test doubles
or a mock framework. You
had to basically fake out
the whole pipeline just to
test your action method. So
If I understand what you're
saying, this notion of separation
of concerns is fundamental in
that it, it's not really
the controller's responsibility to go
futsing around inside of HTTP
context or doing things with
a response object to the
request object. Certainly they can
do that, but if you
really want to separate your
concerns, such that things are
very testable, you don't want
to do that. If someone
calls render view, that means
that now we're running around
inside of HTB context in
our stack frame, we're literally
waiting around. So you've changed
it. So you, rather than
having a void return value,
you return an action result.
And then the work of
calling render view happens elsewhere.
That's correct. So the, the
actual work of calling the
interview happens after your action
method has been evoked. The
key point there is that
as much as possible, we
want you to focus on
your business logic and less
on framework writing code for
the framework. The more you're
thinking about the framework and
what you need, how to
manipulate our framework, the less,
you're a less your focus
on what you really need
to get done. And, and
we just want to minimize
that if we minimize that
to a degree where you're
almost never really thinking about
the framework, then we're doing
our job well. Okay. So
now Jeffrey's project added a
convention controller that I think
you had originally written, and
what does convention controller do?
It, it adds some extra
functionality so that you don't
have to, so you don't
have to have as many
lines of code, do the
same thing. For instance, if
you don't want to declare
the name of the view,
then you don't have to,
it'll just add, it'll just
pick the view. That is
the same name as the
action name and the, the
returning the action result. I
actually just this past week
with the new code drop
of the MVC framework, we've
refactored a bit to keep
in line with the new
code for the MVC framework.
So we're kind of following
along, right? And there's not
a whole lot of disagreement
as far as the philosophy
from what Microsoft is, is
coming out with. And with
NBC contrib, there's only a
few points, but for most,
for the most part, you
know, they obviously contrib is
adding on as opposed to
taking the stance that we
think is being done wrong.
So let's provide something different.
Okay. So less of the
functionality that's provided in NBC
contributors focused on disagreement or
some kind of political statement
within code and more about,
we just want to add
this. We want to make
this available. We want to
make this one more choice,
right? And as there's going
to be many, many more
changes, and as the MVC
framework changes, the MVC country
project is going to be
refactored along with that. And
so, you know, we think
Microsoft's doing a pretty good
job and we're providing more
choices. And so there's, there's
a few points where we
provide alternatives, but we don't
try to take anything away.
Do you think that this
has something to do with
the fact that Phil and
the MVC team have tried
to really engage with the
community and not do this
in a vacuum? I would
think that in the past,
If this were done in
an ivory tower somewhere, NBC
contrib might be more of
a statement that your eyes
aren't listening, you're not doing
this right. We're going to,
we're going to make we're
going, gonna do this differently.
Well, that's exactly why, I
mean, this seems, I mean,
you guys are all very
friendly and stuff. Now we
know Phil's a nice guy.
Yes. Right now we're hugging.
But yeah, I'm just saying
that we're, you guys are
saying that they're, they're making
changes that are substantive from
release to release such that
there's less and less, that
you disagree on. Cause it's
more of a community design.
Right. And there's some, there's
some ideas that popped into
NBC contribute early that they
took and, and put in
into the framework directly. So
they've been super transparent, I
think. Cause you just say
super, super transparent. I think
all the different teams at
Microsoft could take a lesson
from the MVC framework team
about how to involve community
input. I mean, code drops
every six weeks. Has that
ever happened? I don't know.
Not in my lifetime. So
I think they're doing a
tremendous job taking input and
providing insight into what they're
doing. And yeah, NBC contrib
is just to provide extra
options. And as the MVC
framework changes, NVC, Trey will
be refactored or along with
it. Yeah. True. Do you
think that there's anything that
is going on in MVC
contrib that can be pulled
into monorail or what aspects
of Manuel and the castle
project have come over to
MVC contrib? One of the
first things that I saw
come over to the MVC
contrib was the discussion of
the container aspect was the
alternate view choices. So if
you don't like the way
the syntax of the asp.net
view engine works, you can
go and you can use
in velocity, which is alternate
templating system. Because by default,
we have a thing called
the web forms view engine
that uses the very familiar
ASP X syntax is doing
things, but in monorail your
view, and you have a
number of your engines, both
rail and, and velocity. So
how is in velocity different
than using the ASP X
pages that we're familiar with?
Well, the key difference for
me is the level of
control that you have over
the HTML generated. I think
you can still do a
lot of this with the,
the, the web forms engine.
But for me it was
conceptually simpler to control. It
was, it was a lighter
weight concept. You had to
know the HTML, but if
you did, and you wanted
that level of power, it
gave it to you. Hi,
this is Scott. And I
want to let you know
that this week's Hansel minutes
is brought to you by
COVID better.com the code better.com
blog network it's made up
of over 20 industry leaders
and speakers who were passionate
about delivering tried and true
solutions to real world problems
for building better software. These
guys are not only our
sponsor this week, but they're
also my friends. The COVID
better blog network. It's where
industry leaders blog. You can
find them@codebetter.com as well as
devilish S T E V
L I C I O
dot U S. So in
web forms, we have some,
some limited control with, with,
with controls, but we have
master pages. We have theming,
we have scanning have a
lot of CSS stuff that
is built into visual studio
with a web forms view
engine with end velocity. Does
it, what does it look
like? Does it look like
classic ASP in velocity looks
much closer to classic ASP
in that it's, it's a
single pass. We have, I
think both frameworks have, you
know, master pages. We don't
have a really killer IDE
experience. It's it is. It's
just much simpler, kind of
more raw just right there
at the, give you a
complete control of your anchor
brackets at a very basic
level. Exactly. It's, it's more
raw. There are some interesting
extension points. As far as
if you use some syntax
options, then you can get
more interesting control. So say
for output default auto HTML
and code default auto HTML
code. Okay. So there's a
number of options. When someone
wants to go and decide
whether they're going to use
a different controller, there's certainly
a million options on the
model side and three, four
different options. On the view
side, I've spoken about an
animal in the past, is
that velocity, the web forms
view engine, and then also
one called called braille. Yeah.
And braille would be the
BU based an alternate.net language
that has some very interesting
type declarations. It's almost pie.
It's very Python like, and
it's syntax it's yes. It's,
it's got a very strong
Python since to it. Now
it kind of in conclusion,
I wanted to ask you
feel, there's been a lot
of talk here@all.net conference about
the DLR and dynamic languages.
You know, how long till
we get Ruby or Python
views or controllers, that sounds
like a pretty exciting thing.
And I've been seeing some
stuff on your blog that
you've been messing around with
Ruby and MVC. Yeah. I'm
a big fan of the
dynamic languages. I've I sort
of wrote on my posts
on my blog that I'm
not quite ready to get
all meta meta, meta programming,
you know, hours at a
time. But I do see
a huge value even now
in using dynamic languages for
configuration type stuff like using
DSLs. So I've written, I'll
be posting to my blog
pretty soon, the ability to
define routes and Ruby for
an MVC project, as well
as an update to my
Ruby view engine where you
it's similar to our HTML
and you can use Ruby
in the view. So Our
HTML being the default Ruby
view that rails uses. Yeah,
Yeah. It's similar to, it's
a similar spirit. I just
called it that because, you
know, to, it was very
similar to that, but I
don't yet support layouts, which
is like the master page
equivalent. But I think we'll
see a lot more, a
lot more integration and hybrid
approaches where people are, are
mixing static languages with dynamic
languages. And I'm hoping that
MVC is also one of
the first projects that showed
it, demonstrates how to do
that. I mean, all of
this DLR work I'm doing
on my own time, it's
just kind of, you know,
It's a feature now, and
this is the kind of
thing that you do at
Microsoft. Figure out if it's
going to be possible and
people want it. Exactly. You
could. Maybe it wouldn't be
unfair to say that we
could envision a future where
I might an in hibernate
model. I might have a
velocity view with a convention
controller, or maybe I might
swap out a couple of
iron, iron, Ruby views, all
working together and happiness, joy
have fun. Very cool. Well,
thank you very much. Phil
hack, Jeffrey Palermo and true
sellers for sitting down and
talking to me today. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll talk to
you again next week. .